Add English version of GE01 - QGIS plugin development (#72)
GispoCoding/master-training-data: src/GE01_eng/06_exercise_6.Rmd

# Exercise 6: Buffer tool

The goal of this exercise is to create a simple tool which can
be used to select a vector layer and use it to create a new
layer in which a buffer is created from the source layer to
each new feature. A dialog interface is created for the
tool where you can choose a source layer, the distance and
segments of the buffer:

Here is a video showing the functionality of the tool:

![](img/exercise_6/image1.gif)

## Exercise 6.1: Creating the GUI

As learned previously you can create GUIs programmatically

> using PyQt. However especially creating more complex GUIs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using PyQt. However, especially creating more complex GUIs
```

by writing code can be difficult. Qt offers a solution in the
form of a separate program called Qt Designer where you can
design GUIs graphically. You can use it to build your GUI
and save it as a **.ui** file which can be used as a part of
the plugin. On Windows Qt Designer is typically included
as a part of the QGIS installation and can be opened by

> searching its name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
searching for its name.
```

First create a minimal GUI and link it up with
the plugin you created in the previous exercise.
Open Qt Designer where you should be greeted with the following
dialog:

![](img/exercise_6/image2.png)

Select **Dialog with Buttons Bottom** and press **Create**.
Next from the top right "Object Inspector" menu change the
name of the QDialog object to **BufferToolDialog** and edit
the buttonBox object so that the **OK** button is removed.
Select the buttonBox object and scroll down in the **Property

> Editor** which is located below from the Object Inspector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Editor** which is located below the Object Inspector.
```

At the bottom you should see the attributes of the
QDialogButtonBox class. Here you can open the standardButtons

> menu to edit the different buttons. Double click the OK button

Reviewer: ```suggestion
menu to edit the different buttons. Double-click the OK button
```

class BufferToolDialog(QDialog, FORM_CLASS):

    def __init__(self, parent: Optional[QWidget] = None) -> None:
        """Constructor."""
        super().__init__(parent)
        self.setupUi(self)
```
:::

Next open the `test-plugin/testplugin/plugin.py` file. Add to the import commands:

::: code-box
``` python
from testplugin.ui.buffer_tool_dialog import BufferToolDialog
```
:::

The next import command should already exist, but add `tr` to the end of it.

::: code-box
``` python
from testplugin.qgis_plugin_tools.tools.i18n import setup_translation, tr # add 'tr'
```
:::

::: hint-box
`tr()` is a function that translates string depending on the language that is
selected. If you want to translate your plugin for different localities you
should use the function for every string that is visible to the user one way
or another.
:::

Next find the `initGui()` function inside the Plugin class. Edit the `self.add_cation` function call:

::: code-box
``` python
        self.add_action(
            "",
            text=tr("Buffer Tool"),
            callback=self.open_buffer_tool,
            parent=iface.mainWindow(),
            add_to_toolbar=False,
        )
```
:::

::: hint-box

> Here you are defining QAction widgets which will me added to the QGIS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here you are defining QAction widgets which will be added to the QGIS
```

plugin menu. In the plugin template a menu is added to the QGIS
**Plugins** top menu. Here you define the buttons which are
added to a secondary menu which is named after the plugin.

![](img/exercise_6/image4.png){width="50%"}

In order the meaning of the arguments:

> 1. Path to a icon file. If empty the button will have no icon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Path to an icon file. If empty the button will have no icon.
```

4. Parent. Add to the QGIS main window
5. Should a button be added also to a toolbar? In this case no.
:::

Then you can define the `open_buffer_tool()` function which was
referred to previously. Find the `run()` method at the end of
the Plugin class definition and delete it and copy this new
function over:

::: code-box
```python
    def open_buffer_tool(self) -> None:
        """Opens buffer tool dialog"""
        BufferToolDialog().exec()
```
:::

Remember to run this on the commandline:

::: commandline-box
```bash
python build.py deploy
```
:::

Reload the plugin with **Plugin Reloader**. Now inside the
**Plugins** > **Test Plugin** menu there should be a new
button **Buffer Tool** and by clicking it the GUI you saved
earlier should open.

## Exercise 6.3: The functionality of the tool

Next add the needed widgets to the GUI. On the left you have
a list of widgets that can be added used.

You can follow the following step:

1. Drag a **Horizontal Layout** to the dialog. You can make it a bit larger.
2. Drag a **Label** widget **into the layout**.
3. Drag a **QgsMapLayerComboBox** also into the layout, to the right of the label.

![](img/exercise_6/image5.gif)

> 4. Double click the label widget and write **Layer** as its text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Double-click the label widget and write **Layer** as its text.
```

5. Change the name of the QgsMapLayerComboBox object to `layerComboBox`.
6. If you prefer you can also rename the QLabel object.

Repeat the previous steps so that finally you have the following components
alongside a label for them as needed:

![](img/exercise_6/image6.png){width="33%"}

* Layer: QgsMapLayerComboBox (name: layerComboBox)
* Buffer Distance: QgsDoubleSpinBox (name: distanceSpinBox)
* New layer name: QLineEdit (name: newLayerLineEdit)
* QPushButton (name: newLayerPushButton, button text: Create new layer)

Organize the widgets vertically and finally you can create a layout for the
BufferToolDialog itself by right-clicking on the background:

![](img/exercise_6/image7.png){width="50%"}

Once these changes have been made you can write the actual functionality
of the tool step by step. Organize the code of the plugin so that the
functionality of the GUI is defined in Python files under the
`test-plugin/testplugin/ui` folder. The actual buffer functionality
is defined in `test-plugin/testplugin/core`.

> 1. Create the core folder and add an emptry `__init__.py` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create the core folder and add an empty `__init__.py` file.
```

::: code-box
```python
from qgis.core import (
    QgsVectorLayer,
)

class BufferTool:

    @staticmethod
    def create_buffer_layer(src_layer: QgsVectorLayer, buffer_distance: float, new_layer_name: str, segments: int) -> Optional[QgsVectorLayer]:
        print("Creating buffer layer")
```
:::

So far the `create_buffer_layer()` only prints a message, the actual
functionality will be added later. A Python _decorator_ @staticmethod
is used, which means the function can be called without creating an
object of the BufferTool class.

Edit the `test-plugin/testplugin/ui/buffer_tool_dialog.py` file:

Add to the import commands:

::: code-box
```python
from testplugin.core.buffertool import BufferTool
from qgis.core import QgsMapLayerProxyModel
```
:::

Add to the class constructor (`__init__`() method):

::: code-box
```python
        self.layerComboBox.setFilters(
            QgsMapLayerProxyModel.PointLayer |
            QgsMapLayerProxyModel.PolygonLayer |
            QgsMapLayerProxyModel.LineLayer
        )

        self.newLayerPushButton.clicked.connect(self._create_buffer_layer)
```
:::

Here a filter is applied to the layerComboBox object which means only

> point, line and polygon layers are shown. A connection is create from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
point, line and polygon layers are shown. A connection is created from the
```

push buttons `clicked` signal to the `_create_buffer_layer` method that
will be defined next.

Add a new method:

::: code-box
```python
    @log_if_fails
    def _create_buffer_layer(self) -> None:
        selected_layer = self.layerComboBox.currentLayer()
        buffer_distance = self.distanceSpinBox.value()
        new_layer_name = self.newLayerLineEdit.text()
        segments = 5 # this'll be returned to later

        new_layer = BufferTool.create_buffer_layer(
            selected_layer,
            buffer_distance,
            new_layer_name,
            segments
        )

        if new_layer is not None:
            QgsProject.instance().addMapLayer(new_layer)
```
:::

Here the required information is fetched from the widgets and the
`create_buffer_layer` method is called from the **BufferTool**
class.

::: hint-box

> Organizing the coude to different classes into the separate **ui** and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Organizing the code to different classes into the separate **ui** and
```

    feature = QgsFeature(fields)
    feature.setGeometry(line)
    feature.setAttribute("fid", 1)
    return feature

@pytest.fixture
def point_layer(fields, point_feature) -> QgsVectorLayer:
    layer = QgsVectorLayer("Point?crs=epsg:4326&index=yes", "test_points", "memory")
    provider = layer.dataProvider()
    provider.addAttributes(fields)
    layer.updateFields()
    provider.addFeature(point_feature)
    layer.updateExtents()
    return layer

@pytest.fixture
def square_layer(fields, square_feature) -> QgsVectorLayer:
    layer = QgsVectorLayer("Polygon?crs=epsg:4326&index=yes", "test_polygon", "memory")
    provider = layer.dataProvider()
    provider.addAttributes(fields)
    layer.updateFields()
    provider.addFeature(square_feature)
    layer.updateExtents()
    return layer

@pytest.fixture
def line_layer(fields, line_feature) -> QgsVectorLayer:
    layer = QgsVectorLayer("LineString?crs=epsg:4326&index=yes", "test_line", "memory")
    provider = layer.dataProvider()
    provider.addAttributes(fields)
    layer.updateFields()
    provider.addFeature(line_feature)
    layer.updateExtents()
    return layer
```
:::
:::

### Exercise 6.5.1: GUI test

> Write a simple for the plugin dialog. Create a new file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Write a simple test for the plugin dialog. Create a new file
```

`test-plugin/tests/test_buffer_tool_dialog.py`:

::: code-box
```python
from qgis.PyQt.QtWidgets import QDialog, QDialogButtonBox

def test_dialog_close(dialog):
    """Test we can close the dialog."""

    button = dialog.buttonBox.button(QDialogButtonBox.Close)
    button.click()

    result = dialog.result()

    assert result == QDialog.Rejected
```
:::

At the end of the we `assert` that an expression
`result == QDialog.Rejected` is `True`. If it is not,

> then test fails.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then the test fails.
```

### Exercise 6.5.2: BufferTool test

Next define a test for the actual **BufferTool** class.
Create a new file `test-plugin/tests/test_buffer_tool.py`:

<button onclick="toggleAnswer(this)" class="btn answer_btn">test</button>

::: hidden-box
::: code-box
```python
from qgis.core import QgsWkbTypes

from testplugin.core.buffertool import BufferTool

def test_create_buffer_layer_polygon(square_layer):
    buffer_distance = 1.0
    new_layer_name = "Test buffer layer"
    segments = 1

    buffer_layer = BufferTool.create_buffer_layer(
        square_layer,
        buffer_distance,
        new_layer_name,
        segments,
    )

    buffered_feature = buffer_layer.getFeature(1)

    expected_geometry = "Polygon ((-1 0, -1 1, 0 2, 1 2, 2 1, 2 0, 1 -1, 0 -1, -1 0))"

    assert buffered_feature.geometry().asWkt(2) == expected_geometry
    assert buffer_layer.featureCount() == 1
    assert buffer_layer.crs().authid() == "EPSG:4326"
    assert buffer_layer.wkbType() == QgsWkbTypes.Polygon
```
:::
:::

Note that a fixture is given as an argument in the test function.
Pytest handles passing the arguments to the test function
automatically.

> In the test variables are defined with which the BufferTool

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the test we create variables with which the BufferTool
```
